🔐 Network Scanning and Sniffing
A Practical Study Using Nmap and Wireshark
📌 Overview

Network scanning and sniffing are core techniques in cybersecurity, ethical hacking, and network defense. They help security professionals discover active hosts, open ports, running services, and analyze live network traffic for potential threats.

This project focuses exclusively on:

Nmap → Network discovery and scanning

Wireshark → Packet sniffing and traffic analysis

Both tools are widely used by penetration testers, SOC analysts, and digital forensic investigators.

🎯 Objectives

The objectives of this project are to:

Understand the fundamentals of network scanning and packet sniffing

Perform host discovery, port scanning, and service detection using Nmap

Capture and analyze network traffic using Wireshark

Identify security risks such as open ports, insecure protocols, and suspicious traffic

Demonstrate how attackers and defenders use these tools differently

🧠 Key Concepts
Network Scanning

Network scanning is the process of identifying:

Live hosts

Open ports

Running services

Operating systems

It is usually active and involves sending packets to target systems.

Network Sniffing

Network sniffing involves:

Capturing packets traversing a network

Inspecting packet headers and payloads

Detecting malicious or abnormal traffic

It is often passive, meaning it does not directly interact with the target.

🛠 Tools Used
🔹 Nmap (Network Mapper)

Nmap is an open-source tool used for:

Host discovery

Port scanning

Service and version detection

OS fingerprinting

🔹 Wireshark

Wireshark is a network protocol analyzer used to:

Capture live network traffic

Analyze packets at different OSI layers

Troubleshoot network and security issues

🔍 Part 1: Network Scanning with Nmap
1️⃣ Host Discovery

Used to identify active devices on a network.

nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24


🔹 Sends ICMP echo requests and ARP probes
🔹 Lists live hosts without scanning ports

Security Insight:
Attackers use host discovery to map networks. Defenders use it for asset inventory.

2️⃣ Port Scanning

Identifies open, closed, and filtered ports.

nmap 192.168.1.10


🔹 Default scan checks the most common 1,000 TCP ports
🔹 Reveals exposed services

Common Port Risks:

Port 21 (FTP) – cleartext authentication

Port 23 (Telnet) – insecure remote access

Port 80/443 – web attack surface

3️⃣ Service and Version Detection

Determines what service is running on an open port.

nmap -sV 192.168.1.10


🔹 Identifies service name and version
🔹 Useful for vulnerability matching

Example Risk:
Outdated Apache or OpenSSH versions may contain known exploits.

4️⃣ OS Detection

Attempts to identify the target operating system.

nmap -O 192.168.1.10


🔹 Uses TCP/IP fingerprinting
🔹 Helps attackers tailor exploits

5️⃣ Aggressive Scan

Combines multiple scanning techniques.

nmap -A 192.168.1.10


Includes:

OS detection

Version detection

Script scanning

Traceroute

⚠️ Note: Very noisy and easily detected by IDS/IPS systems.

📡 Part 2: Network Sniffing with Wireshark
1️⃣ Packet Capture

Wireshark captures packets from a selected network interface.

Steps:

Launch Wireshark

Select active interface (Ethernet/Wi-Fi)

Click Start Capture

Captured packets include:

Source & destination IPs

Protocols

Payload data

2️⃣ Understanding Packet Structure

Each packet is divided into:

Frame layer

Ethernet layer

IP layer

Transport layer (TCP/UDP)

Application layer

Wireshark decodes packets layer by layer.

3️⃣ Display Filters (Traffic Analysis)
HTTP Traffic
http

TCP Traffic
tcp

DNS Queries
dns

Filter by IP Address
ip.addr == 192.168.1.10


🔹 Filters do not stop capture
🔹 They only control what is displayed

4️⃣ Analyzing HTTP Traffic

Wireshark can inspect unencrypted HTTP data.

http.request.method == "POST"


🔹 Shows login attempts
🔹 Exposes usernames and passwords if not encrypted

Security Risk:
Cleartext protocols leak sensitive data.

5️⃣ Detecting Suspicious Activity

Wireshark helps identify:

Port scans (repeated SYN packets)

ARP spoofing

DNS tunneling

Unusual traffic spikes

Example of possible scan detection:

Multiple SYN packets to different ports

No completed TCP handshakes

🔗 Relationship Between Nmap and Wireshark
Tool	Purpose	Role
Nmap	Active scanning	Discovery & enumeration
Wireshark	Passive sniffing	Traffic analysis & evidence

💡 Defensive Insight:
Wireshark can capture and analyze Nmap scan traffic, making it useful for detecting reconnaissance attempts.

⚠️ Ethical & Legal Considerations

Only scan networks you own or have permission to test

Unauthorized scanning may violate laws and policies

Ethical hacking requires consent and documentation

🧾 Conclusion

Nmap and Wireshark are essential tools in modern cybersecurity.
While Nmap provides visibility into network structure and exposed services, Wireshark reveals how data flows across the network.

Together, they form a powerful combination for:

Network defense

Threat detection

Digital forensics

Ethical hacking

Understanding both tools enhances a security professional’s ability to detect, analyze, and prevent cyber threats.

📚 References

Nmap Official Documentation

Wireshark User Guide

TCP/IP and Network Security Standards
